Introduction:
=============
This repository contains a VSCode STM32CubeIDE project designed to demonstrate the issue that occurs when using picolib in conjunction with a linker description file (STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld) generated by STM32CubeMX v6.17.0.


Test Setup:
===========
STM32CubeMX v6.17.0:
- configuration see: init_array_issue.ioc
- Board: NUCLEO-H753ZI
- Toolchain: CMake
- Default Compiler/Linker: ST Arm Clang
- USART3: Tx=PD8, Rx=PD9, Baudrate=115200
- Clock: HSE 5MHz, CPU Clock=480MHz
- MCU Package: STM32H7 Series v1.13.0
  - this includes the STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld linker script file

Toolchain:
- STM32CubeIDE for Visual Studio Code v3.8.0
- C library: picolibc (default since STM32CubeMX v6.17.0 in .\cmake\starm-clang.cmake)
- starm-clang 21.1.1+st.6
- C++ Standard: C++11, C++17, C++23 (additionally defined in CMakeLists.txt)
- Optimization: -Og (default in cmake/starm-clang.cmake)

Modified Files:
- main.c (prototype `void init_array_issue(void)` and call `init_array_issue()` added)
- syscall.c (__io_putchar added)
- CMakeLists.txt (C++ Standard added, init_array_issue.cpp added)


Introduction:
=============
The code in file `init_array_issue.cpp` demonstrates a misbehavior where, under certain conditions, the initialization of classes is silently skipped — without any warning or error message — when `picolibc` is used together with the linker description file `STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld` generated by STM32CubeMX and the default optimization `-Og`.

- picolibc / STARM_PICOLIBC

  The use of `picolibc` has been the default since the STM32CubeMX update to 6.17.0, configured via the option `STARM_PICOLIBC` in the file `.\cmake\starm-clang.cmake`. Previously, `STARM_HYBRID` was set here by default.

  ```
  # STARM_TOOLCHAIN_CONFIG allows you to choose the toolchain configuration.
  # Possible values are:
  #  "STARM_HYBRID"   : Hybrid configuration using starm-clang Assembler and Compiler and GNU Linker
  #  "STARM_NEWLIB"   : starm-clang toolchain with NEWLIB C library
  #  "STARM_PICOLIBC" : starm-clang toolchain with PICOLIBC C library
  set(STARM_TOOLCHAIN_CONFIG "STARM_PICOLIBC")
  ```
  (Source: `.\cmake\starm-clang.cmake`)

- Optimization level -Og

  The use of the `-Og` optimization has been the default since the STM32CubeMX update to 6.17.0, set in the file `.\cmake\starm-clang.cmake`. Previously, `-O0` was set here.

  ```
  set(CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS_DEBUG "-Og -g3")
  ```
  (Source: `.\cmake\starm-clang.cmake`)


Code Description:
=================
The project tries to illustrate the misbehavior as simply as possible using common patterns.

The project contains three classes.
Class `Foo` is the container holding an object of class `Data` and an array of two elements of class `Operation`.
The single object `foo` of class `Foo` is instantiated in the global scope of the program shortly after the class declarations.

The class `Data` has a const uint8_t `ClsVers` with the value 42.
Note: This value should never, under absolutely no circumstances deviate from 42!
Furthermore, the class expects a value to be passed via the constructor, which is written to the variable `value`.

The class `Operation` is simple and contains only two variables: `id` and `cmd`. The class `Foo` holds an array of two objects of this class.

This construction causes the object `foo` to be linked into the .bss section when optimization `-Og` is used (which is entirely correct).

Excerpt from the `./build/Debug/init_array_issue.map` file:
```
200000b8 200000b8        8     2         CMakeFiles/init_array_issue.dir/init_array_issue.cpp.obj:(.bss.foo)
200000b8 200000b8        8     1                 foo
```


Expected vs. Actual Behavior:
==============================
The method `init_array_issue()` uses the object `foo` to test the behavior. The following output is generated:

```
foo after Start:
================
foo.data.ClsVers = 0x00    (expected: 0x42)
foo.data.value   = 0x0000  (expected: 0xBABE)
foo.op[0].id     = 0       (expected: 0)
foo.op[0].cmd    = 0x00    (expected: 0x00)
foo.op[1].id     = 0       (expected: 0)
foo.op[1].cmd    = 0x00    (expected: 0x00)

foo after writing values:
=========================
foo.data.ClsVers = 0x00    (expected: 0x42)
foo.data.value   = 0xCAFE  (expected: 0xCAFE)
foo.op[0].id     = 1       (expected: 1)
foo.op[0].cmd    = 0xAA    (expected: 0xAA)
foo.op[1].id     = 2       (expected: 2)
foo.op[1].cmd    = 0xBB    (expected: 0xBB)
```

Neither `foo.data.ClsVers` nor `foo.data.value` match expectations after program start. After writing various values, they are stored correctly. However, the const value `foo.data.ClsVers` remains on 0!


Safety Impact:
==============
There is neither a warning nor an error message at build time or at runtime!
Without thorough firmware testing, such a bug can go undetected and — depending on the project — have very unpleasant consequences!


Background Behavior:
====================
Just before the call to the `main` function, the startup assembler file `startup_stm32h753xx.s` calls the function `__libc_init_array`.
This routine is responsible for initializing objects in the `.bss` segment.

This `__libc_init_array` function is part of `picolibc` and can be found in the file `libc\init.c`.

A part of this function calls all function pointers stored between `__bothinit_array_start` and `__bothinit_array_end`. The called functions were generated by the compiler to initialize objects in the `.bss` section.

The following code is a part of `picolibc\libc\init.c` and shows the call of `__bothinit_array_start` and `__bothinit_array_end`:

```
[...]
    /*
     * The init array immediately follows the preinit array,
     * so we can just run both in one loop
     */
    fn = __bothinit_array_start;
    fn_end = __bothinit_array_end;
    while (fn != fn_end)
        (*fn++)();
```
(Source: https://github.com/picolibc/picolibc/blob/main/libc/misc/init.c)

The file `picolibc\libc\includes\sys\_initfini.h` defines these two symbols `__bothinit_array_start` and `__bothinit_array_end` as `weak`. The following code shows this part:

```
[...]
/* These magic symbols are provided by the linker.  */
extern void (*__preinit_array_start[])(void) __weak;
extern void (*__preinit_array_end[])(void) __weak;
extern void (*__init_array_start[])(void) __weak;
extern void (*__init_array_end[])(void) __weak;
extern void (*__bothinit_array_start[])(void) __weak;
extern void (*__bothinit_array_end[])(void) __weak;
```
(Source: https://github.com/picolibc/picolibc/blob/main/libc/include/sys/_initfini.h)


Issue:
======
For this mechanism to work, it is absolutely essential that the linker writes the above-mentioned list of function pointers to the memory. To do this, it requires the two symbols `__bothinit_array_start` and `__bothinit_array_end` in the linker description file, which define the start and end of this memory region. 
If these symbols are missing, `picolibc` cannot initialize anything at this point. 


STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld
====================
The correct place to define these symbols is the file `STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld`.
An analysis of the file shows that the symbols are not present.
Adding the following section to the file causes the `foo` object to be correctly initialized:

```
  PROVIDE(__bothinit_array_start = __preinit_array_start);
  PROVIDE(__bothinit_array_end   = __init_array_end);
```
(see: `.\STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld_fixed`)

Ouput of the test project is as expected:

```
foo after Start:
================
foo.data.ClsVers = 0x42    (expected: 0x42)
foo.data.value   = 0xBABE  (expected: 0xBABE)
foo.op[0].id     = 0       (expected: 0)
foo.op[0].cmd    = 0x00    (expected: 0x00)
foo.op[1].id     = 0       (expected: 0)
foo.op[1].cmd    = 0x00    (expected: 0x00)

foo after writing values:
=========================
foo.data.ClsVers = 0x42    (expected: 0x42)
foo.data.value   = 0xCAFE  (expected: 0xCAFE)
foo.op[0].id     = 1       (expected: 1)
foo.op[0].cmd    = 0xAA    (expected: 0xAA)
foo.op[1].id     = 2       (expected: 2)
foo.op[1].cmd    = 0xBB    (expected: 0xBB)
```


Influencing Factors:
====================
During testing, several factors were identified that influence whether the `foo` object is placed in the `.bss` segment (then the bug is visible) or in the `.data`m segment (then the bug is hidden):

- Number of elements in the `Operation op[]` array: 
  - `Operation op[1]` => `.data`
  - `Operation op[2]` => `.bss`

- Presence of a constructor in class `Data`. 
  - no constructor => `.data`
  - with constructor => `.bss`

- Size and structure of `Foo` class
  - Additional line `uint8_t buffer[16];` before `Data data{0xBABE};` => `.data`
  - Additional line `uint8_t buffer[16];` after `Operation op[2] = {};` => `.bss`
  
- Optimization 
  - -O0 => `.data`
  - -Og => `.bss`

- Toolchain config
  - Using `"STARM_NEWLIB"` don't need the symbols => normal behavior.
  - Using `"STARM_PICOLIBC"` needs the missing symbols => bug   

All of that is entirely correct behavior. The compiler only decides where the object is placed. 

The bug is simply the interaction between the `weak` declaration in `picolibc` and the missing symbols `__bothinit_array_start` and `__bothinit_array_end` in the linker description file.


Proposal:
=========
@ STMicroelectronics:
- Please insert the missing part when generating linker description files.
- Think about the concept. In my opinion, it’s not good practice for a system to not give a warning or error message when there’s a drastic change in how it works. Something fatal could happen.


Steps to use the Project:
=========================
1. Install the STM32CubeIDE for Visual Studio Code v3.8.0 extension in VSCode
2. Install the Serial Monitor extension in VSCode (https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.vscode-serial-monitor)
   or use another RS232 serial tool
3. Connect the NUCLEO-H753ZI board via USB
4. Open `init_array_issue.ioc` in STM32CubeMX v6.17.0 and click the button `GENERATE CODE`
5. Double-click on init_array_issue.code-workspace
6. Select `debug` as target
7. Build the project
8. Connect the Serial Monitor at 115200 baud to the board
9. Start the debugger and check the output

Hint: if you change something like `STARM_TOOLCHAIN_CONFIG` or the `STM32H753XX_FLASH.ld` file, make sure the project is completely rebuilt.
